docs: Send Data Alloy page + Interactive Examples (#13367)
grafana/loki: docs/sources/send-data/alloy/examples/alloy-kafka-logs.md

    {{< docs/ignore >}}
    ```bash 
    docker-compose -f loki-fundamentals/docker-compose.yml up -d 
    ```{{exec}}
    {{< /docs/ignore >}}

    This will spin up the following services:
    ```bash
    ✔ Container loki-fundamentals-grafana-1      Started                                                        
    ✔ Container loki-fundamentals-loki-1         Started                        
    ✔ Container loki-fundamentals-alloy-1        Started
    ✔ Container loki-fundamentals-zookeeper-1    Started
    ✔ Container loki-fundamentals-kafka-1        Started
    ```

We will be access two UI interfaces:
- Alloy at [http://localhost:12345](http://localhost:12345)
- Grafana at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000)
<!-- INTERACTIVE page step1.md END -->

<!-- INTERACTIVE page step2.md START -->

## Step 2: Configure Alloy to ingest raw Kafka logs

In this first step, we will configure Alloy to ingest raw Kafka logs. To do this, we will update the `config.alloy` file to include the Kafka logs configuration.

{{< docs/ignore >}}
**Note: Killercoda has an inbuilt Code editor which can be accessed via the `Editor` tab.**
{{< /docs/ignore >}}

> ### Loki Kafka Source component

Author: Great point!! I will get that changed

  forward_to             = [loki.write.http.receiver]
  relabel_rules          = loki.relabel.kafka.rules
  version                = "2.0.0"
  labels                = {service_name = "raw_kafka"}
}
```

In this configuration:
- `brokers`: The Kafka brokers to connect to.
- `topics`: The Kafka topics to consume. In this case, we are consuming the `loki` topic.
- `forward_to`: The list of receivers to forward the logs to. In this case, we are forwarding the logs to the `loki.write.http.receiver`.
- `relabel_rules`: The relabel rules to apply to the incoming logs. This can be used to generate labels from the temporary internal labels that are added by the Kafka source.
- `version`: The Kafka protocol version to use.
- `labels`: The labels to add to the incoming logs. In this case, we are adding a `service_name` label with the value `raw_kafka`. This will be used to identify the logs from the raw Kafka source in the Log Explorer App in Grafana.

For more information on the `loki.source.kafka` configuration, see the [Loki Kafka Source documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/loki.source.kafka/).

### Loki Relabel Rules component

> Next, we will configure the Loki relabel rules. The `loki.relabel` component rewrites the label set of each log entry passed to its receiver by applying one or more relabeling rules and forwards the results to the list of receivers in the component’s arguments. In our case we are directly calling the rule from the `loki.source.kafka` component.

Reviewer: it would help to have a sentence describing why you would want to do this. At the bottom of this section you point out that we're adding `__meta_kafka_topic`.  You might just make some mention of wanting to filter all logs based on those which came from kafka, and that label being a convenient way to do that (or somesuch)

Open the `config.alloy` file in the `loki-fundamentals` directory and copy the following configuration:
```alloy
loki.relabel "kafka" {
  forward_to      = [loki.write.http.receiver]
  rule {
    source_labels = ["__meta_kafka_topic"]
    target_label  = "topic"
  }
}
```

In this configuration:
- `forward_to`: The list of receivers to forward the logs to. In this case, we are forwarding the logs to the `loki.write.http.receiver`. Though in this case, we are directly calling the rule from the `loki.source.kafka` component. So `forward_to` is being used as a placeholder as it is required by the `loki.relabel` component.
- `rule`: The relabeling rule to apply to the incoming logs. In this case, we are renaming the `__meta_kafka_topic` label to `topic`.

For more information on the `loki.relabel` configuration, see the [Loki Relabel documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/loki.relabel/).

> ### Loki Write component 

Reviewer: See earlier comment: "Send Logs to Loki"

Lastly, we will configure the Loki write component. `loki.write` receives log entries from other loki components and sends them over the network using the Loki logproto format.

Open the `config.alloy` file in the `loki-fundamentals` directory and copy the following configuration:
```alloy
loki.write "http" {
  endpoint {
    url = "http://loki:3100/loki/api/v1/push"
  }
}
```

In this configuration:
- `endpoint`: The endpoint to send the logs to. In this case, we are sending the logs to the Loki HTTP endpoint.

For more information on the `loki.write` configuration, see the [Loki Write documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/loki.write/).

### Reload the Alloy configuration

Once added, save the file. Then run the following command to request Alloy to reload the configuration:
<!-- INTERACTIVE exec START -->
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:12345/-/reload
```
<!-- INTERACTIVE exec END -->

The new configuration will be loaded this can be verified by checking the Alloy UI: [http://localhost:12345](http://localhost:12345).

> ## Stuck? Need help?

Reviewer: Nice touch.

{{< /docs/ignore >}}

<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore START -->
```bash
docker compose -f loki-fundamentals/greenhouse/docker-compose-micro.yml up -d --build 
```
<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore END -->

{{< docs/ignore >}}

```bash
docker-compose -f loki-fundamentals/greenhouse/docker-compose-micro.yml up -d --build
```{{exec}}

{{< /docs/ignore >}}

This will start the following services:
```bash
 ✔ Container greenhouse-db-1                 Started                                                         
 ✔ Container greenhouse-websocket_service-1  Started 
 ✔ Container greenhouse-bug_service-1        Started
 ✔ Container greenhouse-user_service-1       Started
 ✔ Container greenhouse-plant_service-1      Started
 ✔ Container greenhouse-simulation_service-1 Started
 ✔ Container greenhouse-main_app-1           Started
```

Once started, you can access the Carnivorous Greenhouse application at [http://localhost:5005](http://localhost:5005). Generate some logs by interacting with the application in the following ways:

- Create a user
- Log in
- Create a few plants to monitor
- Enable bug mode to activate the bug service. This will cause services to fail and generate additional logs.

> Finally to view the logs in Loki, navigate to the Loki Logs Explore view in Grafana at [http://localhost:3000/a/grafana-lokiexplore-app/explore](http://localhost:3000/a/grafana-lokiexplore-app/explore).

Reviewer: good use of explore logs

  backend:
    imageid: ubuntu
---

<!-- INTERACTIVE page intro.md START -->

#  Sending Logs to Loki via Kafka using Alloy

Alloy natively supports receiving logs via Kafka. In this example, we will configure Alloy to receive logs via Kafka using two different methods:
- [loki.source.kafka](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/loki.source.kafka): reads messages from Kafka using a consumer group and forwards them to other `loki.*` components.
- [otelcol.receiver.kafka](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol.receiver.kafka/): accepts telemetry data from a Kafka broker and forwards it to other `otelcol.*` components.

<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore START -->

## Dependencies

Before you begin, ensure you have the following to run the demo:

- Docker
- Docker Compose

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
Alternatively, you can try out this example in our interactive learning environment: [Sending Logs to Loki via Kafka using Alloy](https://killercoda.com/grafana-labs/course/loki/alloy-kafka-logs).

It's a fully configured environment with all the dependencies already installed.

> ![Interactive](/media/docs/loki/loki-ile.svg)

Author: Yeah sadly I just getting a massive paragraph of HTML tags rather than the image if I try and use the shortcode inside admonition

Provide feedback, report bugs, and raise issues in the [Grafana Killercoda repository](https://github.com/grafana/killercoda).
{{< /admonition >}}
<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore END -->

## Scenario
In this scenario, we have a microservices application called the Carnivorous Greenhouse. This application consists of the following services:
- **User Service:** Manages user data and authentication for the application. Such as creating users and logging in.
- **Simulation Service:** Generates sensor data for each plant.
- **Websocket Service:** Manages the websocket connections for the application.
- **Bug Service:** A service that when enabled, randomly causes services to fail and generate additional logs.
- **Main App:** The main application that ties all the services together.

> - **Database:** A database that stores user and plant data.

Reviewer 2: Did we lose the bullet point for the Plant service?

Author: good catch I must have removed it accepting changes

<!-- INTERACTIVE page step1.md END -->

<!-- INTERACTIVE page step2.md START -->

## Step 2: Configure Alloy to ingest raw Kafka logs

In this first step, we will configure Alloy to ingest raw Kafka logs. To do this, we will update the `config.alloy` file to include the Kafka logs configuration.

### Open your Code Editor and Locate the `config.alloy` file

Grafana Alloy requires a configuration file to define the components and their relationships. The configuration file is written using Alloy configuration syntax. We will build the entire observability pipeline within this configuration file. To start, we will open the `config.alloy` file in the code editor:

{{< docs/ignore >}}
**Note: Killercoda has an inbuilt Code editor which can be accessed via the `Editor` tab.**
1. Expand the `loki-fundamentals` directory in the file explorer of the `Editor` tab.
1. Locate the `config.alloy` file in the `loki-fundamentals` directory (Top level directory).
1. Click on the `config.alloy` file to open it in the code editor.
{{< /docs/ignore >}}

<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore START -->
1. Open the `loki-fundamentals` directory in a code editor of your choice.

> 1. Locate the `config.alloy` file in the `loki-fundamentals` directory (Top level directory).

Reviewer 2: Try to avoid parentheses.
```suggestion
1. Locate the `config.alloy` file in the top level directory, `loki-fundamentals'.
```

1. Click on the `config.alloy` file to open it in the code editor.
<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore END -->

> The below configuration snippets will be added to the `config.alloy` file.  

Reviewer 2: Make this active voice.
```suggestion
You will copy all three of the following configuration snippets into the `config.alloy` file.  
```

- `forward_to`: The list of receivers to forward the logs to. In this case, we are forwarding the logs to the `loki.write.http.receiver`.
- `relabel_rules`: The relabel rules to apply to the incoming logs. This can be used to generate labels from the temporary internal labels that are added by the Kafka source.
- `version`: The Kafka protocol version to use.
- `labels`: The labels to add to the incoming logs. In this case, we are adding a `service_name` label with the value `raw_kafka`. This will be used to identify the logs from the raw Kafka source in the Log Explorer App in Grafana.

For more information on the `loki.source.kafka` configuration, see the [Loki Kafka Source documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/loki.source.kafka/).

### Create a dynamic relabel based on Kafka topic

Next, we will configure the Loki relabel rules. The `loki.relabel` component rewrites the label set of each log entry passed to its receiver by applying one or more relabeling rules and forwards the results to the list of receivers in the component’s arguments. In our case we are directly calling the rule from the `loki.source.kafka` component.

> Add the following configuration to the `config.alloy` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now add the following configuration to the `config.alloy` file:
```

loki.relabel "kafka" {
  forward_to      = [loki.write.http.receiver]
  rule {
    source_labels = ["__meta_kafka_topic"]
    target_label  = "topic"
  }
}
```

In this configuration:
- `forward_to`: The list of receivers to forward the logs to. In this case, we are forwarding the logs to the `loki.write.http.receiver`. Though in this case, we are directly calling the rule from the `loki.source.kafka` component. So `forward_to` is being used as a placeholder as it is required by the `loki.relabel` component.
- `rule`: The relabeling rule to apply to the incoming logs. In this case, we are renaming the `__meta_kafka_topic` label to `topic`.

Lastly, we will configure the Loki write component. `loki.write` receives log entries from other Loki components and sends them over the network using the Loki logproto format.

For more information on the `loki.relabel` configuration, see the [Loki Relabel documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/loki.relabel/).

### Write logs to Loki

Lastly, we will configure the Loki write component. `loki.write` receives log entries from other loki components and sends them over the network using the Loki logproto format.

> Add the following configuration to the `config.alloy` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And finally, add the following configuration to the `config.alloy` file:
```

Once added, save the file. Then run the following command to request Alloy to reload the configuration:

<!-- INTERACTIVE exec START -->
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:12345/-/reload
```
<!-- INTERACTIVE exec END -->

The new configuration will be loaded this can be verified by checking the Alloy UI: [http://localhost:12345](http://localhost:12345).

## Stuck? Need help?

If you get stuck or need help creating the configuration, you can copy and replace the entire `config.alloy` using the completed configuration file:

<!-- INTERACTIVE exec START -->
```bash
cp loki-fundamentals/completed/config-raw.alloy loki-fundamentals/config.alloy
curl -X POST http://localhost:12345/-/reload
```
<!-- INTERACTIVE exec END -->

<!-- INTERACTIVE page step2.md END -->

<!-- INTERACTIVE page step3.md START -->

## Step 3: Configure Alloy to ingest OpenTelemetry logs via Kafka

Next we will configure Alloy to also ingest OpenTelemetry logs via Kafka, we need to update the Alloy configuration file once again. We will add the new components to the `config.alloy` file along with the existing components.

### Open your Code Editor and Locate the `config.alloy` file

> Like before, we generate our next pipeline configuration within the same `config.alloy` file. The below configuration snippets will be added **in addition** to the existing configuration. Essentially, we are configuring two pipelines within the same Alloy configuration file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like before, we generate our next pipeline configuration within the same `config.alloy` file. You will add the following configuration snippets to the file **in addition** to the existing configuration. Essentially, we are configuring two pipelines within the same Alloy configuration file.
```
